4 Technical Solutions
There are two strategies for dealing with the above difficulties: feature extraction and pattern
classification based on the extracted features. One is to construct a “good” feature space in
which the face manifolds become simpler i.e., less nonlinear and nonconvex than those in the
other spaces. This includes two levels of processing: (1) normalize face images geometrically
and photometrically, such as using morphing and histogram equalization; and (2) extract features
in the normalized images which are stable with respect to such variations, such as based
on Gabor wavelets.
The second strategy is to construct classification engines able to solve difficult nonlinear
classification and regression problems in the feature space and to generalize better. Although
good normalization and feature extraction reduce the nonlinearity and nonconvexity, they do
not solve the problems completely and classification engines able to deal with such difficulties
8 Stan Z. Li and Anil K. Jain
are still necessary to achieve high performance. A successful algorithm usually combines both
strategies.
With the geometric feature-based approach used in the early days [5, 10, 14, 24], facial
features such as eyes, nose, mouth, and chin are detected. Properties of and relations (e.g.,
areas, distances, angles) between the features are used as descriptors for face recognition. Advantages
of this approach include economy and efficiency when achieving data reduction and
insensitivity to variations in illumination and viewpoint. However, facial feature detection and
measurement techniques developed to date are not reliable enough for the geometric featurebased
recognition [7], and such geometric properties alone are inadequate for face recognition
because rich information contained in the facial texture or appearance is discarded. These are
reasons why early techniques are not effective.
The statistical learning approach learns from training data (appearance images or features
extracted from appearance) to extract good features and construct classification engines. During
the learning, both prior knowledge about face(s) and variations seen in the training data are
taken into consideration. Many successful algorithms for face detection, alignment and matching
nowadays are learning-based.
The appearance-based approach, such as PCA [28] and LDA [3] based methods, has significantly
advanced face recognition techniques. Such an approach generally operates directly on
an image-based representation (i.e., array of pixel intensities). It extracts features in a subspace
derived from training images. Using PCA, a face subspace is constructed to represent “optimally”
only the face object; using LDA, a discriminant subspace is constructed to distinguish
“optimally” faces of different persons. Comparative reports (e.g., [3]) show that LDA-based
methods generally yield better results than PCA-based ones.
Although these linear, holistic appearance-based methods avoid instability of the early geometric
feature-based methods, they are not accurate enough to describe subtleties of original
manifolds in the original image space. This is due to their limitations in handling nonlinearity
in face recognition: there, protrusions of nonlinear manifolds may be smoothed and concavities
may be filled in, causing unfavorable consequences
Such linear methods can be extended using nonlinear kernel techniques (kernel PCA [25]
and kernel LDA [19]) to deal with nonlinearity in face recognition [11, 16, 20, 31]. There, a nonlinear
projection (dimension reduction) from the image space to a feature space is performed;
the manifolds in the resulting feature space become simple, yet with subtleties preserved. Although
the kernel methods may achieve good performance on the training data, however, it may
not be so for unseen data owing to their more flexibility than the linear methods and overfitting
thereof.
Another approach to handle the nonlinearity is to construct a local appearance-based feature
space, using appropriate image filters, so the distributions of faces are less affected by various
changes. Local features analysis (LFA) [22], Gabor wavelet-based features (such as elastic
graph bunch matching, EGBM) [15, 30, 17] and local binary pattern (LBP) [1] have been used
for this purpose.
Some of these algorithms may be considered as combining geometric (or structural) feature
detection and local appearance feature extraction, to increase stability of recognition performance
under changes in viewpoint, illumination, and expression. A taxonomy of major face
recognition algorithms in Figure 1.8 provides an overview of face recognition technology based
on pose dependency, face representation, and features used for matching.     